what's going on everyone Tanner here and
spring is in full effect we're in the
mid 60's to lower 70s right now which
means I can finally finally get outside
that's right I'm out here I'm feeling
good I feel like myself again no more
seasonal affect disorder not only am i
free but they're free as well they've
been locked up all winter just ready to
roam free that's not what you came here
for today is this kind of video
[Music]
that's right this one is gonna be all
about moss
more specifically collecting it I got to
get some from various projects that I'm
working on right now so I wanted to
bring you guys along for the ride and
show you some tips and tricks let's get
right into it when you're looking from
Austin look no further than your own
yard where my garden right now and as we
were planning things the past weekend I
noticed that there was a lot of nice
moss in here so let me show you what we
got down here some of the losses that I
was telling you about and we have a
variety down here I believe it's mostly
star moss and thread moss now before we
get into that I know a lot of you guys
are curious about how I identify my
mosses and that's something I will get
through as we go further into the video
but in the meantime this is some thread
moss and star moss so let's take a few
patches here
[Music]
so I'm just filling up this compartment
of my trusty container here with mosses
from my garden but before we finalize
that I just wanted to show you this
little scene here I have a composer
using the rule of thirds but this is the
kind of stuff that I reference whenever
I'm doing my setups and I just thought
it was a really cool scene and wanted to
share it with you guys
now underneath of my deck can we have
some really choice badge moss under here
but as you can see somebody's already
been taking it for themselves so I don't
know who it was but somebody's been
doing it and they had the right idea so
we're gonna take some of it for
ourselves exist stuff is a really choice
now I know that many of you are gonna be
able to find moss in your yard but the
best place to look really is out here in
the woods now to be honest right now
there's probably actually a better
selection in my yard and that's largely
because we're pretty early in spring
there's not any foliage on the trees yet
so the forest floor and everything it's
drying up quicker than it typically
would so are the mosses that are
available here are dried out but that's
not necessarily a bad thing down here
you can get a better look what I was
telling you about as you can see the
moss is really dried up and it just
peels up really easily now that's nice
because we're not getting any of the
dirt or other stuff that sticks to it
and since it's dried out it's actually
gonna acclimate really well to your
setup because right now it's still kind
of dormant it thinks it's winter or it's
not sure quite yet what it wants to do
but when we put it in our setup it's
gonna think hey it's spring it's summer
and then it's just gonna grow like mad
so it's actually not a bad thing to get
a piece that's kind of dormant and dried
out like this we're about 20 feet from
where we just were and this is actually
a perfect example of the opposite of
what we just saw this area is a little
bit more shaded by the logs and
everything here and this is just like a
rotten stump full of moisture so it's
actually gonna retain moisture for the
moss to feed off of and it's thriving
whereas that other stuff looks like it's
all dried out and both are completely
alive it's just that this stuff kind of
has a head start on the moss that you
just saw now if you want a harvest moss
that's growing on wood it's best to
actually take some of the wood that it's
growing on even if it's just a thin
layer because this is what the moss is
accustomed to growing on for ever reason
it seems to like whenever you keep a
portion of the wood with it and then
they can gradually work up to whatever
type of setup you have them in so if
it's a substrate if it's on another
piece of wood any sort of growing
surface they're gonna acclimate to that
quicker because they already are growing
on what they're used to and then they
can kind of branch out from there so to
speak or spread out to their noon
and they should do quite well here's a
location that has all of the right
conditions year round meaning that the
moss typically never goes dormant it's
always out and about and in this
location it's actually a lot wetter than
some of the places we saw previously so
much so that it's almost like a bog and
in this spot there's a lot of live
reward and sphagnum Moss there's other
types of mosses too but predominantly
sphagnum Moss and you're really not
going to see that in other locations
it's typically in bog conditions or
really wet areas now it will grow in
terrariums and whatnot that are not
quite as what is this but whenever
you're looking for it out in the wild
you're only going to find it in spots
like this so I definitely came for some
of this
[Music]
if you're in a location that's plentiful
with moss and there's also a lot of leaf
litter around it's worth moving the leaf
litter to see if there's anything under
it it's often time to find some hidden
gems underneath of there as you can see
if I move all these leaves there's just
a ton of liverwort underneath of here
now live reward isn't a moss but it
grows in pretty much the same conditions
typically preferring areas like this
where it's really moist but I wanted to
take some of this and talk about it in
this video just because like I said it
grows in similar conditions and pretty
much if you're gonna be able to grow
moss you're gonna be able to grow it
forward about ten feet from where we
just were there's a pretty substantial
patch of mixed mosses and here we have
some hypno moss and some star mosses and
this is a perfect place to show you
bought my moss code what I like to do is
whenever I take away from patches of
moss like this I'll only take what I
need maybe like a little section like
this I'm not gonna take this entire
sheet of Moss and deplete it from the
forest because what if I want to come
back to the same spot and I want this
Moss again or if by chance somebody else
is collecting Moss back here I highly
doubt it but if they were they could
take from this patch as well or even I
don't want to take away from the beauty
of nature here so I take what I need and
for example if I were to take from the
middle of the patch like this I'll often
sort of work it back in like that and
it's almost like nothing that ever
happened but I don't want this patch so
I'm gonna put it back and let it do its
thing I get a lot of comments from
people who say that I should have
brought a shovel with me or something
like that I guess they don't like
getting dirt on their hands while protip
keep your nails short you're not going
to get dirt under there and you don't
need to wear gloves but that aside
whatever you're collecting Moss you
don't need to be digging it up or
anything like that just get your hand
and kind of peel it up like that real
simple you don't need to be digging
anything up there just touch the surface
of the ground and should peel out pretty
pretty easily here's another area that's
pretty wet we have some hypno moss here
and it's growing on a rotten log which
of course is saturated with water this
again will be one where we have to take
whatever it's growing on it looks like a
little bit of
or even some of the rotten tree just
attached there and again this is looking
pretty good because it's in an area
that's nice and wet I definitely think
that I collected enough mosses from back
here for now there's one thing that I
want you to take away from this though
before you get going and that is
whenever you're out in the woods looking
for moss find the areas of moisture for
the best mosses of course you're gonna
see them everywhere but if you find that
stuff that's growing in your areas that
are already wet those are what's gonna
do best in your terrarium they're gonna
acclimate the quickest and there will be
less lag time so to speak
pretty much all mosses will work in
terrariums long term but those ones
especially there will be pretty much
another acclamation they'll just start
growing like crazy
we're back in the animal room I got the
studio set up we've got all of our
spoils here before we open these up and
take a look at the mosses I just want to
make a quick mention of the container
itself obviously it's nice because it
has a divider and I can separate the
mosses based on type but it's also nice
because I don't actually have to use
these right away I'd say you've got
about two or three days before you got
to get the mosses out of here
since they're sealed up they're actually
gonna retain a lot of the water that's
in the mosses themselves and keep them
hydrated so they're not gonna dry out
you can see on the side here there's a
little bit of condensation and that's a
perfect sign of that as I put the mosses
out on this piece of coroplast here I'm
gonna separate them based on type so
they can give you some pointers on how
to identify whatever you have
[Music]
and here we are a beautiful spread of
mosses there's quite a variety here and
if you don't think that's something nice
to look at I don't know what is I know
early on in the video I said I was gonna
give you a lot of information on how to
identify mosses for yourself now I kind
of retract that statement because as I
tried to film it for this video I
realized that I didn't want to just
shove it into a short little segment
because it's a really in-depth topic so
I'd rather save it for a dedicated video
so do it at some point in the future but
anyways let's look at the mosses that
we've collected here let's start out on
the right with some thread moss now this
is a really common moss and I say common
because I'm sure you've seen it before
if you've ever been in an urban setting
and you've seen moss growing in between
cracks of the pavement
I'm almost guarantee that it's this Moss
right here I don't know what it is about
this one as opposed to the others but
this one is always in settings like that
and the way that you could tell this
Moss apart from the others is that it's
really fine if you touch it it almost
feels like hair if you turn it to the
side it looks like individual strings or
threads as the common name implies a
pretty cool one this one of those really
well in terrariums and if you put it in
there and let it grow for a few months
it's literally gonna look like a patch
of hairs because it grows up about an
inch tall or so a bunch of little
individual threads it looks really cool
on to these ones here which may look a
little odd right now this is some star
Moss that has a bunch of sporophyte
growing out of it now what sporophyte
are without getting into too much detail
is basically the mosses equivalent of a
flower
they each have a bunch of Moss spores in
them they'll get disrupted by the wind
or what have you and then the moss pores
will get spread and moss will grow
elsewhere the way that you can identify
star Moss is that if you look at it it
looks like a bunch of individual stars
growing close to the ground
that's stay relatively small I'll show
you Moss here in a moment that looks
really similar but it grows much larger
and taller where it's like I said this
one stays low to the ground and is
smaller
pretty cool Moss same does really well
in terrariums on to the ones that I said
look like star Moss but or not what we
have here is some hair cap Moss as you
can see it's a good bit taller and a
decent amount larger than what you saw
previously
there's also
Brown sporophyte growing out of this one
so that could be an indicator as well
but these ones do fairly well in
terrariums for the most part I would say
though that if you're looking at hair
cap Moss be sure that you're getting one
like this that is completely green if
you get the ones that are about two
inches tall and they're mostly brown the
whole way up and then green on the top
they really don't do well in terrariums
you could definitely experiment with it
if you wanted to I haven't had success
with them but I'd usually do it these
ones this is a great accent as well
because it can grow pretty tall has some
great texture to it and definitely one
of the ones that I like wait let's back
that up a little bit I don't know what I
was saying there I like all mosses
anyways let's take a look at this Magnum
Moss this one is extremely easily
identifiable obviously it's much larger
than the other ones and it's also
engorged with water if you feel it it's
kind of springy sponge like none of the
other ones are quite like that as you
pull it out of the ground it's usually
not gonna have much attached to it if
anything and like I said earlier in the
video you're really only gonna find it
in extremely wet locations like a bog or
something like that so if you see this
I'm pretty sure you're gonna know what
it is the same goes for the next one
which is some fern moss I mean if you
look at that close-up it looks like a
bunch of individual ferns obviously none
of the other ones have that
characteristic so you know right away
this is some fern Moss this one is
pretty cool just obviously because of
how it looks it grows really well under
variable conditions and something
interesting about this specimen in
particular is that whenever we first
harvested them they were really dried
out but just from sitting in those
containers with other mosses for a day
or two they already picked up a lot of
that moisture and they look much more
lives than they did previously moving
over again we have some hypno moss
Hittner moss is pretty easily
identifiable for a few reasons
one is the color as you can see it's a
much brighter green than all of these
other ones here almost like a chartreuse
color and it typically does look like
that another reason is the way that it
looks if you look at it closely it looks
like a cotton string woven together and
although there are other mosses that
look like that this one especially has
that characteristic which is pretty cool
this one also has some sporophyte
growing out of it
which look much different than the ones
that we saw previously I will say that
this mas doesn't always do well in
terrariums I think that it is a hard
time acclimating to new environments
that said I have had some success with
it in the past and it's definitely worth
trying because it's a pretty common moss
over here we have another Moss that's
pretty easy to identify if you look at
it close up it almost looks like a bunch
of individual leaves growing on stems
but don't be confused this is a moss and
this one is bad Moss it's not really too
common but it will grow really well on
terrariums and it will add a lot of cool
textures so if you can get your hands on
this one I definitely recommend it
because it's a great one and it always
seems to do really well last thing we
have some live reward like I said this
isn't a moss but it shares a lot of the
same characteristics you're typically
gonna find it in the same locations and
it requires pretty much the same
conditions to thrive so I figured it was
worth throwing it into this video for
the most part these are easy to identify
there are some that look like the badge
Moss I showed earlier so you may confuse
the two but for the most part they look
like this one here almost like kelp or
seaweed growing low to the ground
occasionally they can have a trident
shape to them this one here doesn't but
again really easy plant to grow works
really well on terrariums looks awesome
and it's a great addition alongside
these now that I've shown you off the
moss is I harvested I got to get them in
a propagation bin here but before I do
that I want to clean them off a little
bit and what I have here is just some
dechlorinated water now I'll typically
reference whatever type of water that
I'm using but dechlorinated is
especially important for mosses because
they're pretty sensitive to chlorine and
chloramines the reason that I like to
clean my mosses is to get rid of any
excess debris it will also help hydrate
them a little bit and get them ready for
the life of a terrarium but also to get
rid of some pests there will be some
things that sort of hitchhike on here
and obviously dipping them in water
isn't gonna get rid of everything but it
will help against noticeable pests and
again all that I'm doing is just dipping
the mosses in the water clearing them of
debris getting them nice and hydrated
and then I'm putting them in my
propagation bin here and I'm separating
them by
type of moss obviously they're pretty
close together but I'm gonna be using
them in no time so there'll be spots for
it to grow and everything like that I
almost forgot to mention that if you
want to learn more about this
propagation method that I'm doing right
here check out the link up here I have a
whole video dedicated exclusively to
this so will give you an idea as to
exactly what I'm doing here
I also do collect moss in that video but
I didn't go as in-depth as I did in this
video but hopefully the combination of
these two should give you a pretty good
framework to start with this gives you a
good idea of everything that I cleaned
out of the moss obvious a lot of it is
just dirt so it's discoloring the water
but there is a ton of debris in there
that really you just don't need it if we
want pristine moss I've gotta clean out
all this debris and it will grow
perfectly the last thing that I'll do is
spray this down with some dechlorinated
water again dechlorinated water and just
getting it all good to go then after
good spray down we seal it up and it's
ready to go and that's going to do for
this one surface squad I hope that you
guys learned a thing or two that you can
utilize while you're out in the field
collecting moss if you want to learn
more about the propagation process that
I showed in this video I'll leave a link
down in the video description on a video
all about it as well as my outdoor
essentials videos I go a lot of videos
where I'm outside doing cool things like
this and I definitely think that there
must watch so if you're downloading you
want to see some more content definitely
follow those links lastly I thank you so
much for watching if you enjoyed the
video and haven't done so already be
sure to leave me a thumbs up as it
really helps me to continue creating
content like this and I look forward to
seeing you guys on the next one take
care and I'll see you next time peace
[Music]